lots of the world-old
from the pendulum to dark matter
slightly cryptic title but it starts
with that man Galileo so Galileo was
studying medicine in 1851 and it was
actually bored in church one day and
used his pulse as a stopwatch to time
the chandelier that was blowing in the
wind backwards and forwards must have
been a very boring sermon I think and he
noticed something rather curious he
can--he difference whether the
chandelier took a swing of a short swing
or a long swing to the amount of time
taken for it to return to its original
position so the longer the swing the
faster it was moving and it always came
to the same time and he thought that was
rather curious and being a good
scientist though though at home and
tried it out what he did was he got two
pendulums each of the same length and
realized that they kept time regardless
of various factors what the size of the
sweep was of the pendulum no matter what
the mass of the Bob the lump of lead on
the end of the string was and in fact
went on to realize that the a thing that
mattered was the length of the string
and he realized that the square root of
the length of the string controlled the
period of the pendulum so came out with
a mathematical formula for it and so
it was another hundred years before
christiaan huygens after whom a space
probe that landed on the moon of Saturn
called Titan was named used this to
actually make clocks to make the
pendulum clock the first really rather
accurate timepieces now the second part
of this story really then we jump
forward a little bit
who Kepler and Kepler very famous
scientist for analyzing the orbit of the
planet Mars he's on his bosses data his
boss and his mentor was Tycho Brahe Hey
and what he was trying to do was work on
idea of Ptolemy and the fact that all of
the planets moved around and moved
around the earth in circles and the
system was getting more and more
complicated with circles on circles
being added as in the diagram here the
little pink planet is doing a circle
mounted on another circle that's moving
around point X in the center and even
tried it with having the earth offset
away from that central point but no
matter what he did couldn't make things
fit way to make the data meet the
observations eventually he decided to
abandon the use of circles as you
probably all know and came out with his
famous first Thor what he thought about
was that perhaps the power of the Sun
was somehow weakening with distance and
so that planets would speed up near the
Sun and slow down while farther away as
part of this investigation and he pried
a formula for Mars where the speed was
proportional to one over the distance an
inverse relationship so slower the
further away the planet was but no
matter what he tried he couldn't get
that to work out until he started to use
ellipses for the orbits and with an ax
lit Sun at one of the focal points of
the early
suddenly everything started to work and
the planet would move around the ellipse
it would move faster when it was at
perihelion the near point than the
nearest approach to the Sun and then
slow down again as it moved away to the
further point in fact the set law he
went further and figured out that a
planet sweeps out an area of the ellipse
that is equal in equal times no matter
which part of its orbit it is on
you
and so the planet moves more slowly when
it's further away and more quickly when
it's nearby but the area of those
triangles the short fat one or the long
thin one is equal regardless of where
you happen to be in the orbit is second
or and it's actually example of
conservation of angular momentum its
third law worked out that the time
squared the orbital period squared is
proportional to the cube of the distance
now you can actually prove this quite
easily from Newton's laws which we'll
come on to in a moment
and it's a little job that I get my
students that I teach GCSE to sometimes
to do in their mathematics and it's
quite a nice little worked example is
that you can draw a nice plot of the
periods of the orbits and the semi-major
axis the long axis of the ellipse if you
plot them against each other using a
logarithmic plot like this then you see
they fit a straight line very very
accurately and the slope of that line is
2/3 which tells you given that it's a
log-log plot that the power law is T
squared is proportional to D cubed so
those are Kepler's laws which told us
about planets well that started with
pendulums well let's have a look a
pendulum moves slowly at top of its
swing and fast at the bottom planet
slowly when they're far away from the
star but they speed up as they whiz past
the near point of perihelion and then
slow down again so they're doing the
same thing as the pendulum moving slowly
when they're highest in the gravity
field and fastest when they're lowest
so the stage was set for that man to
come and figure everything out the man
with the falling Apple story enter Isaac
Newton and the nice little story about
this is he was having conversations with
Robert Hooke and didn't really get on
very well with Robert Hooke but he was
arguing about the appearance of a
comet's in 1682 81 and this was really
the trigger for Newton to go and figure
out what was going on he was provoked by
Edmund Halley and so Christopher Wren
and a small bet and they bet that Robert
Hooke who claimed to have the proof
couldn't come up with it and Newton said
he had it but he disappeared for three
years and actually improved that an
elliptical orbit must result if the
force acting from the center is
proportional to the inverse square of
the distance and it's that rule that
allows you to prove all of Kepler's laws
as well but he had to invent the whole
of calculus differential calculus and
all in the book I say he published it
actually Edmund Halley published the
book for him and was probably the
motivating force in getting Newton to
finish the book and get it out there and
that book is philosophy naturalis
principia mathematica or print appear
for shorts that probably changed the
world more than almost any other
it wasn't the last button this subject
pierre-simon Laplace came along and
built on Newton's laws extending the
mathematics to try and work out the
finer points of the orbits and in
particular looking at some outstanding
problems they noticed by very careful
observation that Jupiter's orbit was
shrinking and Saturn's orbit was growing
and perhaps that's a little bit
disturbing because if that continued
then Jupiter would sweep in and probably
destroy or at least disrupt the inner
solar system in 1763 Laplace was able to
show that it was all part 929 year-long
cycle and I like this chart here which
shows the variations in the period of
Jupiter's orbit and Saturn's orbit and
also the little wobbles on top of both
which are actually the results of all of
the other interactions with the other
planets but you can see the main effect
is Jupiter and Saturn swapping energy
between each other and then swapping
back again in this cycle that was
discovered that the solar system was
stable in the long run and that we
weren't going to have a giant planet
sweeping into the inner solar system and
destroying the earth but if you remember
that graph just for a moment and we then
look back to the story of the pendulum
this is a little equipment you can do
with a roller and some paper and a
pendulum that's dropping sand or ink or
something
if you roll the paper past the pendulum
at a constant speed you will get this
same wavy line that comes out and the
reason for this all starts to relate to
the energy of what's going on in a
pendulum the energy swaps between the
highest point of the swing where the
pendulum is stationary and has no
kinetic energy but has maximum potential
energy
hundred percent stored potential energy
at the endpoints of the swing there some
of the swing where it's moving fastest a
hundred percent of the energy is now
being translated into the kinetic energy
of motion you could start and see that
you get a swapping backwards and
forwards of energy between the two forms
the kinetic energy Rises reaches a
maximum and then comes back down and
vice-versa the potential energy it goes
in the opposite sense so the energy is
flowing backwards and forwards between
those two forms but it probably wouldn't
surprise you that the total remains
constant
that's the law of conservation of energy
after all but a more surprising result
is that on average over time the kinetic
energy is half of the total maybe that
wouldn't surprise you but you could do
the mathematics quite easily and work
out that if you just take the average
level then it comes out as half and
there's an illustration of air you can
the math effect three hours to do it I
won't go into it and bore you with it
but it does prove that the average of
the kinetic energy is half of the total
and I'm droning on about that because
it's important for us in a moment now if
we go to 1772 the next here over this
talk is Lagrange and he started looking
at what happens in more complicated
situations where you have three bodies
and in particular he was looking at the
Earth Moon Sun three body problem of the
moon's orbit and trying to solve it and
what he realized was that there was a
theory called the virial theorem says
that over time the average of the total
gravitational energy in any system be it
a planet orbiting a star or a moon
orbiting a planet or a child on a swing
here or indeed Galileo's pendulum will
always be split 50-50 between the
kinetic energy of motion and the
potential energy no matter what the
complexity of the system this is an
example of how energy tends to follow an
equi partition rule if you give it a
number of different forms into it and
spread in a stable system that remains
the same over a long period of time and
isn't evolving then on average the
energy will split
spread spread itself equally between all
the different forms that's there the
virial theorem
right so enough of the sort of theory
and mathematics for a minute let's just
look at some practical side of this
first thing we're going to do is I don't
do this question do you weigh a galaxy
nice picture of the Andromeda galaxy
here now the first thing you can note
about the galaxy is whiteness is
probably equal to the number of stars in
the galaxy multiplied by the average
brightness of the Stars fairly
straightforward you might have bad in
the effect of glowing gas and you might
have to worry about nebulas and dark
nebulae blocking your line of sight and
dimming the obscuring effect of dust and
you might allow for all of those and
then come up with an estimate for the
mass based on how many stars you think
there are and the average mass of a star
and if you do all of those things you
can come up with a reasonable estimate
for the mass of a galaxy but nothing you
can do with a galaxy is measure how fast
it's rotating so we can look at the
Stars
orbiting around inside the galaxy and
measure their speeds and check to see if
they're obeying Kepler and Newton and
Rubin here had a go at doing this and
the reason the way she did it was to use
the Doppler effect stars that are moving
towards us along the line of sight have
their light blue shifted and if they're
moving away from us their light gets red
shifted and we can detect that by
looking at the spectral lines where
different elements in the atmospheres of
those stars absorb different wavelengths
and they will appear to move to the red
or to the blue end depending on the
velocity towards or away from us of the
Stars so you can do that for a galaxy
you couldn't do it for the ones shown
here very well because the stars are
rotating around the center
of this lovely spiral galaxy in the
plane that we're looking at it using and
so there's not very much movement along
the line of sight going on but if you
think that hilted more towards and away
from us then you will find that the side
that is coming towards us is shifted to
the blue and the side that's going away
shifted to the red as illustrated in the
bottom diagram there and there's a graph
of the amount of shift being plotted out
there overlaid on top of the color-coded
image now when we do this we get a chart
and you can try and work out whether or
not you think it complies with Kepler's
laws for the motion which says that
things that are further away should
orbit more slowly and you have to allow
for the fact that the only mass that you
should take into account is the mass
that's closer to the center of the
galaxy than you are and so if you do
that and you work out how fast you think
things ought to be moving in that galaxy
you get a curve represented by the
dotted line there so as you begin to
move away from the center the speed goes
up because there's now more and more
material nearer to the center than you
are and so it's gravity is acting on you
to make pull you it around the orbit and
then that reaches a peak as you head
towards the outer edges of the galaxy
and then the diminishing distance starts
to kick in and the curve falls away
again unfortunately the actual
measurements shown here are two sets of
measurements from starlight in the
optical in yellow and then further outs
looking at the movements not of stars
but of clouds of hydrogen gas using 21
centimeter radio follow a rather
different curve which doesn't seem to be
behaving this was a real surprise
but the idea that something was going on
had also been arrived at earlier this is
a picture of the Coma Cluster of
galaxies all these many many galaxies in
this picture there's some large
elliptical ones in the middle there and
the more you look the more you see there
are loads and loads of smaller spiral
galaxies and we can understand the
distance there 320 million light years
approximately away from us in this huge
cluster there's two large elliptical
ones right in the middle there there's a
10 byte spiral galaxies and in 1933 I
Fritz Vicky I decided to study this now
it wasn't a very nice man apparently and
at the gesture he's making at the top
there it is allegedly he was being
rather derisory of his colleagues saying
that they were spherical idiots in other
words it didn't matter which way you
looked at them they were still an idiot
I don't think that endeared him it
wasn't going to win friends and
influence people and so perhaps that's
why this result that he came out with
was ignored for quite a long time it was
estimated the masses of all of these
galaxies earlier based on their
brightness you could infer how much
starlight there is and therefore how
many stars and therefore get an idea of
the total amount of mass it also looked
movement using the Doppler shift again
and found that they were moving too fast
the cluster cured have flown apart long
ago this galaxies were moving way too
fast to be constrained by the amount of
gravity that he was able to attribute to
the mass of all of the galaxies so he
wondered what was holding this together
and it was a question of looking at the
energies you can balance up the energies
the kinetic energy of movement and
there's the formula for it 1/2 MV
squared half the mass times the speed
squared so we could get at that by
measuring the speed of the galaxies and
their masses it can also ask
gravitational potential energy there's
the formula for that potential energy is
mg H the mass times the height times the
overall strength of gravity a little bit
more complicated than that in reality to
do but never mind and this just depends
on the position and the masses of the
galaxies is the point and what he
realized was that using the virial
theorem that we talked about if the
cluster was stable in the long run then
half of the energy to be on average in
kinetic energy and half of it ought to
be in potential energy so in any given
moment you would expect the most likely
outcome was a 50-50 distribution of
energy between those possibilities
however when he worked it out all of the
mathematic he was a factor of 10 a small
significant factor and he wondered how
he could possibly have got it wrong
Brickner being wrong was that there was
way more mass than could possibly be
accounted for by all of the visible
material in the galaxy cluster and he
even allowed for all the dust and darker
material and all of the really hot gas
between the galaxies made an estimate
for that and he figured that there must
be something out there that we can't see
and came up with the name dark matter
for it which is really of this talk and
he really wondered could they really be
that but strange stuff that we can't see
a factor of 10 more dark matter this
mysterious substance whatever it was or
are we just making a mistake so first of
all could this dark matter be dust could
it just be dust blocking the line of
sight to stars making us underestimate
the mass of these distant galaxies well
the problem with that is that over
millions of years dust would be
absorbing the light and thereby blocking
our our line of sight to the Stars and
accounting for why we were under
estimating them it would heat up and so
we would start to see that dust glowing
in the infrared part of the spectrum as
it warmed up and we just don't we can
look with our infrared telescopes so we
can rule out any intervening dirt and
dust blocking the line of sight and
dimming these galaxies
makes possibility was black holes well
black holes are not directly visible and
that dense things however would create
gravitational lenses one of Einstein's
that if you have a black hole in the
line of sight between your telescope and
a star it will Bend the light around it
and if the alignment is perfect you will
get a double image or indeed a ring in
three dimensions this works to produce a
2d ring called an Einstein ring that you
would observe instead of just a single
image of the star and so you would
certainly see distortions of distant
objects and you could tell if there were
that many black holes in the
line-of-sight that were causing you to
underestimate the mass of these clusters
of galaxies when we do this in
telescopes directly towards our galactic
center where there are millions of
millions of millions of potential stars
that could be gravitationally lensed by
wandering black holes so there's lots of
opportunities for this to happen we
really didn't see very many we don't see
anything like the number of these
gravitational microlensing events so our
galaxy at least is not stuffed full of
wandering black holes something that I'm
sure you are probably quite pleased to
hear because we wouldn't really want
that be very very dangerous to have that
many black holes wandering around
accounting for nine tenths the mass of
our galaxy perhaps and if it's true in
our galaxy it's probably true in the
others goes the argument now we called
these things a sieve compact halo
objects or macho's it's always good to
make up a ridiculous acronym for these
things but the reason they made up
macho's for anything that behaved like a
black hole that was a very dense lump of
matter was because the other explanation
for what dark matter might be
was whooped they had wimps and macho's
and this idea is that perhaps there are
undiscovered subatomic particles that
might exist but we have not been able to
detect them and we don't see them the
name wimp comes from weakly interacting
massive particle and the clue but from
massive it obviously needs to be a
massive particle in order to account for
this missing mass but it needs to be
weakly interacting what's that all about
the universe seems to have four
fundamental forces in it it has the
strong nuclear force that holds the
nucleus of an atom together holds the
neutrons and the protons together and if
we assign that a strength one then
second strongest force is the one
underneath it the electromagnetic force
which keeps the electrons in orbit
around those nuclei and is responsible
for the vast majority of what we see
around us chemistry physics of real
objects is mostly dominated by the
clouds of electrons in the atoms that
things are made of and that is one 137th
approximately times the strength of the
strong force so a little bit weaker but
not excessively so now the big
difference between the two really is
that the strong force has a range limit
of 10 to the minus 15 of a meter and
really doesn't act outside the domain of
the atomic nucleus at all whereas
electromagnetism well it can traverse
the whole of the universe now the third
force is the weak force which is
responsible for radioactivity whereby
nuclei spit out neutrinos and positrons
and other particles and decay and that
is a million times weaker than the
strong nuclear force so 10 to the minus
6 in the spring
box there and also has a very short
range even shorter than the strong force
10 to the minus 18 of a meter a tenth
the diameter of a proton unbelievably
short and last and weakest of all the
forces turns out to be gravity the force
between two particles has a strength on
this same scale of 6 times 10 to the
minus 39 that's ludicrous it's really 40
orders of magnitude weaker than the
strong force
but as an infinite range and the crucial
thing about gravity is that it's always
attractive all masses be they matter or
antimatter or anything always attract
each other whereas things like the
electromagnetic force you have both
positive and negative charges and whilst
opposite charges attract each other like
charges repel and so if you have a body
that's electrically neutral it cancels
out that electromagnetic force whereas
there is no cancelling gravity now Dark
Matter turns out to be truly transparent
to all forms of electromagnetic
radiation so it doesn't respond to the
electromagnetic force at all
light radio gamma rays will all go
straight through it from pass right on
through as if there was nothing there
and that's what they mean by weakly
interacting they also means that that's
not interacting with the strong force it
might interact with the weak force it
may well do so and it certainly has to
interact with gravity because it has
mass and that's the whole point of the
hypothesis if dark matter is that it
must interact with gravity so we know it
doesn't interact with the first two
certainly interacts with the bottom one
but it doesn't does or does not interact
with the weak force and nobody's
entirely sure yet okay so that's the
fundamental point about weakly
interacting a wimp one of these
hypothetical particles would just
interact with those bottom two and would
completely ignore the electromagnetic
and strong force and the biggest piece
of evidence that I think we have that
explains all of this brings a lot of
these ideas together and it's embodied
in this one image the image of the
bullet cluster what we have here are two
galaxy clusters one larger one on the
left and a smaller one on the right and
they have collided with each other and
in fact when galaxies collide with each
other the galaxies are so far apart
compared to their own size they don't
tend to hit each other the two clusters
tend to fall right through each other
and keep on going and that's what's
happened here in the blue colored zones
on the left you can see one of the
clusters of galaxies and the other
smaller one is over there on the right
is after the collision these two
clusters here okay
what we've got in the pink the red color
is hot gas that's x-ray emissions blue
has been marked where the mass of the
system is so the clusters are where the
arrows point the yellow arrows the gas
is where the x-rays are coming from
where the red arrows are pointing but
the blue areas there are where the mass
is measured to be okay the mass is
measured by looking at how the clusters
of galaxies have through their mass of
the whole galaxy caused a lensing effect
and Einstein gravitational lensing
effect on the far distant galaxies in
the background the much redder ones
there's one that you can just pick out
just a lens in the background bit here
varies from the amount that those images
have been distorted you can work out how
much mass there is in the galaxy cluster
and even its distribution and that's
been indicated by where they've colored
it in blue so what happened is that the
two clusters have fallen through each
other stars and galaxies have kept on
going no direct hits have occurred and
it takes a direct hit foot to stop them
so they've sailed on through they they
fell under gravity picked up speed and
then climbed the gravity hill the other
side and slowed down again just as a
pendulum would s can't do that
because it's a continuous object the two
clouds of hot gas that belonged to the
galaxies have hit each other
and slowed each other down and that is
why the red pinky areas there have been
left behind by their original parent
galaxies they've suffered drag and been
slowed down but the mass has gone with
the galaxies all of the matter must
therefore have not been in the form of
gas or dust or diffuse objects
and it's not in the galaxies because we
can estimate their mass from their
brightness it's in the form of dark
matter and it's fallen right through
without being slowed down so it interact
with itself by anything other than
gravity or the weak interaction perhaps
nothing slowed it down and it would have
been the electromagnetic interactions
that slowed it down so this is extremely
strong evidence that it is this
particular type of matter now we have
our Milky Way galaxy and we have the
ability to trace what's going on outside
it in the form of the debris left from
where the Milky Way galaxy has been
eating dwarf galaxies for breakfast and
leaving tidal tails behind around the
outside of the Milky Way and that also
allows us to get a feel for the mass of
the Milky Way galaxy and work out where
that mass is in the form of the Dark
Matter halo which must extend way out
around the outside of the Milky Way
itself in quite a large ellipsoid there
and that explains those orbital
velocities of stars and the fact that
you have to go a very long way outside
the galaxy before you are far enough
away that you are outside all of the
mass and therefore Kepler's laws start
to apply properly well what about other
explanations other people have tried
many times and perhaps one of the most
popular attempts coming up with a
different physical theory that says that
Newton isn't quite right about all of
this and one of them is Mordechai
Milgram here with his theory called mond
which is stands for modified Newtonian
dynamics and the idea is that a small
change an extra term in Newton's
laws of gravity can be allowed when the
acceleration is very low to just give
their extra effect to gravity to account
for the rotation of the orbits of
galaxies and galaxy clusters and thereby
remove the need for dark matter it's an
attempt to modify the laws to fit the
observations now of course this is what
scientists are supposed to do we're not
supposed to stick doggedly to the
theories of Isaac Newton when all the
observations are telling us that the
theory doesn't fit the data we're
supposed to change our theories aren't
we and it's amazing how scientists are
so stubborn that they don't do that now
Mordecai's theorem has made some quite
successful predictions and quite a good
fit to a lot of observations so it's not
a completely crackpot idea but just
recently this tiny dwarf galaxy has been
discovered goes by the number DF - and
it's 65 million light-years away from us
and they've managed to measure the
orbital speed of the stars in this
little dwarf galaxy and it matches the
orbital speeds that Kepler's laws would
show without there being any dark matter
now this turns out to be proof of dark
matter in the sense that it rules out
all the other theories of modified
gravity because a theory that says that
gravity behaves differently just in the
presence of normal matter can't explain
a galaxy that behaves according to
Kepler's laws like this it's a slightly
tricky point
no such modified gravity theory can just
say oh well in this particular case it
behaves like Newton but in all the other
cases gravity is modified to behave
differently whereas the dark matter
theory can say oh it's fine
this this dwarf galaxy just doesn't have
any dark matter in it somehow the dark
matter has become separated from all of
the stars
perhaps there's been a gravitational
interaction with a larger neighbor at
some point and all the dark matter and
stars have been stripped away so this
particular galaxy doesn't have any dark
matter but it can't not have any extra
gravity
you
hope that points clear it's a very very
strong argument now you also look at
large-scale structure of the universe
using things like the Digital Sky Survey
from Sloan to map the structure of the
huge area of the universe now it hasn't
observed the bits where the data is not
marked as black there but the other
filamentary structures going way out
across the universe are the organization
of clusters of galaxies and the color
represents hail dense those clusters are
so the red bits of the dense bits and
the green yellow bits less dense and
then you've got huge dark voids between
the galaxies and we're on computer
simulations of how gravity would form
the large-scale structure of the
universe starting off with what we think
the conditions were like after the Big
Bang we have to plug 90 percent dark
matter into the equations otherwise
these filamentary structures that we
observe just don't turn up in us our
simulations whereas if we do assume dark
matter
then the simulations come out to look
just like this and match extremely well
so it's very strong evidence that there
must be this extra mass in the universe
basically if there wasn't the dark
matter then the structure of the
universe would take much much longer to
pull everything together into these
knots and lumps and filaments would end
up with a largely smooth and empty
universe it could also actually use the
presence or absence of the distorting
effect caused by Einstein's
gravitational lensing to map where the
dark matter is in the universe and
effectively do a CT scan of the universe
over time and over two dimensions of
space and work out a 3d model of where
the is in the universe and this is the
picture now this takes a little bit of
explaining we have I'm going from the
left to right and the two-dimensional
slice of the density of dark matter
starts at the left in oldest times and
then moves over progressively more more
modern times to the right until the
present time at the right hand end of
the diagram and what you can see is that
gradually over time the right hand end
of that looks much clumpy ER with big
voids and rather dense regions whereas
the older further to the left you go the
more that the dark matter is more evenly
spread out and so it shows that over
time gravity is making that dark matter
clumpy ER and clumpy ER as the self
gravity of everything is pulling it in
tighter and tighter and that fits the
simulations as well so I'm very
confident but there is this substance
called dark matter out there and that
one day we're going to find out what its
made of and that will be very very
exciting and interesting indeed was it's
not part of any of our standard particle
theories people are trying to go and
find dark matter and trap it and this is
the IceCube experiments at the South
Pole at least this is the building on
top of it because there is a cubic
kilometer of transparent super clear ice
below this machine here and it's full of
lots of little optical sensors looking
for the flash of light caused by
neutrinos coming in from all directions
and hitting very very occasionally
because neutrinos are a type of weakly
interacting particle they only interact
by gravity having very low mass that's
very insignificant and by the weak force
they're a product of the weak force in
radioactivity and so occasionally they
hit the nucleus of an atom and they
cause a little flash of light from the
recoil and that's what Ice Cube is
looking for but it's also looking for to
see if incoming dark matter particles
might crash into ordinary matter and
interact with it through that weak force
and cause a similar but detective Lee
different flash from the neutrinos so
far they have found nothing at all also
doing experiments in deep mine shafts
over in the States looking for dark
matter this is the LZ dark matter
experiment which is a giant tub of
liquid xenon a mile underground kept
very cold indeed looking again for those
flashes of light of the recoil when a
wimp a particle of dark matter hits the
nucleus of a xenon atom in the liquid
and the theory it should produce a flash
of light and we should be able to detect
it
so far nothing found and this is the
third experiment deep in and mine in
Minnesota they're using germanium
crystals and the guy in the pursuit is
getting the equipment together and this
is going to be cooled right down to near
absolute zero and listen for the sound
waves produced by dark matter
interacting with ordinary matter in
these crystals as it goes through it's
going to be at ten millionths of a
degree above absolute zero unbelievably
cold but no results yet and you're
probably all familiar with this picture
the cosmic microwave background
radiation and this too has something to
say as to as regards evidence for dark
matter it's the heat signature left over
from the Big Bang started off at the
temperature of the surface of a star at
about three or four thousand degrees
when it was emitted this light when the
universe first became transparent about
380,000 years after the Big Bang it's at
cooled enough for the electrons to bind
to the nuclei and form neutral atoms and
that let the electromagnetic radiation
loose through the universe as it became
transparent to it nowadays because of
the expansion of the universe the
wavelength has been stretched right out
into the microwave and so we see the
effective temperature of it not as three
or four thousand degrees but two point
seven degrees above absolute zero and
there are tiny tiny one part in a
hundred thousand fluctuations in that
temperature as we look in different
directions across the sky occasional
cold spots and hot spots but they're
very very minor but if we look at the
structure of those cold spots and see
how big the ripples in that pattern are
then this can only come out right in our
similar
and our models of the earliest stages of
the universe if dark matter was present
so again another whole strand of
evidence pointing towards that there
really is this stuff out there even
though we just haven't managed to detect
it yet and gravity waves the laser
interferometer gravity wave Observatory
LIGO probably heard that it detected the
merger of some 30 solar mass black holes
as they spun in and a spiral towards
each other and merge together
now we're quite curious as to the origin
of these black holes because stars when
they collapse in type 2 supernova and
compress their cores down tend to
produce black holes of a few solar
masses
whereas galaxies in their centers tend
to have supermassive black holes that
have the mass of maybe a million or even
a billion solar masses so where do these
intermediate tens twenties 30s 40s of
solar masses black holes that we are
detecting come from are they left over
from the original formation of the
universe leftovers of the Big Bang are
they perhaps the product of dark matter
black holes forming in their earliest
possible time we just don't know it's a
very interesting subject indeed now
furthermore we can look at cosmic
microwave background radiation in
extreme detail and see a pattern
embodied on it which look like those
dark matter black holes might be casting
shadows you can see that in the image on
the right that has been enhanced those
gray blotchy areas could be the shadows
cast by dark matter black holes from the
Big Bang we're blocking out the light of
the original Cosmic Microwave Background
now we need to study these in more
detail and the Euclid telescope was due
to go up this year and to go to look for
lots more of these micro lensing events
ease events caused by dark holes dark
matter black holes and we haven't had
the results for that yet so I'm eagerly
awaiting finding out more about this and
maybe we can start to get a handle on
and solve the puzzle so thank you very
much for listening that's from the
pendulum to dark matter all the evidence
that we have that leads us to believe
that there is this mystery substance out
there in the universe that you can't see
smell or touch and yet we have never
managed to put our finger on it and
detect it despite our best efforts it's
quite a puzzle